the Picatrix
Liber Rubeus Edition

The

Occult

C l a s s i c

M a g i cC o m p l e t e

o f
in

A s t r o l o g i c a l
One

V o l u m e

Translated and Annotated by
John

Michael

Greer

Christopher

Warnock

ADOCENTYN
P r e s s

and

P i c a t r i x Liber R u b e u s E d i t i o n
Copyright © 2010-11 John Michael Greer & Christopher Warnock
I S B N 978-1-257-77958'!
All Rights Reserved

Renaissance Astrology
www.renaissanceastrology.com
Adocentyn
Press

ffilrsscO lie ttiou Into is no ccoob, ano ciimcB lie t&cp tint BtcaUftis boob!

To Kathleen & Sara

4

C & e ^ i c a t r i ^ i L i b e r U u b e u a Gftrttwn

Contents
Translators' Introduction

n

T h e Picatrix in Context

12

T h e Picatrix and the Necronomicon

14

Picatrix in Practice

16

A N o t e on the Text

18

Warning and Disclaimer

19

Prologue

21

Book One

24

Chapter One

25

How you may know your degree in the universe
Chapter Two

26

What magic is and what its properties are
Chapter Three

30

What the heavens are and what their substance is
Chapter Four

31

The general theory and arrangement of the heavens for
making magical images
Chapter Five

39

Examples of the theory of images, and of those things
needful for making magical images
Chapter Six

52

In what degree everything exists in the universe and how it
is known that man is a lesser world and corresponds to the
greater world
Chapter Seven
In what degree everything in the universe exists, and many
other profound things, hidden by the wise, that we intend
to reveal in this book of ours

55

Content*
Book Two
Chapter One
Howit is possible to learn this science

Chapter Two
The images of heaven and their secrets

Chapter Three
All the works of the planets, the Sun, and the Moon

Chapter Four
The motion of the eighth sphere and the fixed stars

Chapter Five
The division of this science among nations, and which part
of it each nation possesses

Chapter Six
The virtues of images, and by what means they may be had, and
how images may receive the powers of the planets, and ho w works
are done by images, and this is the foundation of the science of
magic and images

Chapter Seven
How to work dialectically in the science of magical images,
and what part this ought to have in this science

Chapter Eight
The order of natural things, and how they may enter into this science

Chapter Nine
Examples of the figures and forms of images that call down
the assistance of the planets

Chapter Ten
The stones proper to each planet and the formation of figures

Chapter Eleven
The images of the faces of the signs and their effects

Chapter Twelve
The figures and degrees of the signs and their effects according
to the opinion of the Hindus, and how they proceed in the
contemplations of this science, and in what manner the virtues
of superior bodies are attracted according to the opinions of the

Cfje IHcatrij*-JUber Kubeu* Gftrition

6

same, with notable secrets

Book Three

131

Chapter One

133

The parts of the planets that exist in plants, animals and metals

Chapter Two

137

O f the parts of the signs in the aforesaid three existences,
that is, plants, animals, and minerals

Chapter Three

140

O f the figures, colors, garments, and incenses of the planets,
as well as the colors of the faces of the signs

Chapter Four

143

W h y the secrets of this science may not be understood except
a little at a time

Chapter Five

143

In which is demonstrated the virtue proper to animals and
noteworthy things necessary in this science, and how the
spirits of the planets are attracted by figures and suffumigations

Chapter Six

150

The magistery of drawing planetary spirits with natural
things, and what a magical image is and how it can have this power

Chapter Seven

154

Attracting the virtues of the planets, and how we may speak
with them, and how their influences are divided among planets,
figures, sacrifices, prayers, suffumigations, and propositions;
and the state of the heavens necessary to each planet

Chapter Eight
The way of prayer with which the Nabateans used to pray to
the Sun and Saturn, and how they would speak to them and their
spirits and draw forth their influences

Chapter Nine
How to attract the powers of each planet and the powers of
their spirits, naming them according to their parts, and how to
accomplish this by speaking their names

182

Content*
Chapter Ten

7
192

A demonstration of the confections of planetary spirits, and
preventing dangers from ceremonies and effects, and of the
wonders of magic, and of the food, suffumigations, unguents,
and odors that one who invokes planetary spirits ought to use;
and the proper effects, and works that are not done except in appearance

Chapter Eleven

204

T h e effects of magical images in diverse things, as well as in
alterations of sight, so that things are seen other than as they
are; and causing sleep and waking, and making poisons and
their remedies

Chapter Twelve

220

Rules Necessary in this Science

Book Four

224

Chapter One

225

By what virtue and force spirit proceeds, and what are the
properties of spirits, bodies, sense, intellect, and soul, as well as the
differences between them

Chapter Two

231

W h a t vigor the spirit of the Moon brings to this inferior world,
and what ought to be done with each of the seven planets

Chapter Three

243

What the Chaldeans held to be the profundities and secrets of this
science, and what they said about it

Chapter Four

244

The images and reasonings that greatly further this science

Chapter Five

254

The ten sciences that are necessary to this art, and how this
science is helped by them, and what is the foundation of the science of
magic

Chapter Six
How the suffumigations of the stars ought to be made, and
certain compositions necessary to this science

257

IC&e iPteatriF-iltber Kubetia CDitlon

8

Chapter Seven

i6z

The things of the magical art found in the book The Chaldean
Agriculture which Abudaer Abemiaxie translated from the
Chaldean language into Arabic
Chapter Eight

276

The virtues of other things which Nature does by her own properties
Chapter N i n e

281

Images whose virtues perform marvels, that were found in a
book that was discovered in the church of Coredib and the book
of Queen Folopedre; and a description of all the rules necessary in
working with magical images
Glossary

294

Bibliography

300

Index

302

3ntrotutction
Translators' Introduction
n an age when such terms as "classic" are the everyday fare of advertising
A copywriters, it is difficult to know how to introduce a genuine classic of
^ J occult literature, but the book you hold in your hands is impossible to
describe in any other way. Originally written sometime in the ninth century
by an anonymous Arab wizard in North Africa or Spain, and credited in the
fashion of the time to the notable Sufi and scholar al-Majriti, it was originally
titled Ghayat al-Hakim, "The Goal of the Sage."
Like so many works of Arabic occultism, it eventually found its way
to Europe. It was translated into Spanish and Latin at the court of Alfonso
the Wise, King of Castile, in the year 1256, and received the new title of
Picatrix. Scholars to this day are uncertain what the name means. The
explanation that seems most plausible is that it is the Latin version of an
Arabic transliteration—perhaps Buqratis—of a Greek original; it is tempting,
though unprovable, to suggest that the name may have been Harpocrates,
the Hellenistic Egyptian god of silence and mystery. The Latin text makes the
mystery more intriguing by claiming that Picatrix was the name of the book's
author.
The influence of Picatrix on the magical traditions of the western world
was immense. Most of the significant scholarly occultists of the late Middle
Ages appear to have drawn on it, or on material borrowed from it by other
authors. Marsilio Ficino, whose translation of the Corpus Hermeticum
launched the Renaissance occult revival, borrowed heavily from it for his
pathbreaking Three Books on Life\ Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa's Three Books
of Occult Philosophy was even more extensively influenced by Picatrix, and
some of the leading figures in the English occult renaissance of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries—Simon Forman, Elias Ashmole and William
Lilly—used it as a primary source for their own magical work. With the end
of the Renaissance and the rise of the scientific materialism that dominated
seventeenth-century culture, however, Picatrix dropped from sight, and the
revival of magic in the western world that began in the middle of the 19th
century passed it by. Even today it remains the least known of the major
works of western occultism.

iz

C&e i^catrif'itfber liiubeua Litton
The Picatrix in Context

o understand why Picatrix had so great an impact on its own
time, and has been so thoroughly forgotten in ours, it needs to
be recognized as the extraordinary work it is. It is not simply a
collection of magical recipes and rituals, like the grimoires of a later period.
Though it does contain plenty of detailed instructions in magical procedures,
its central focus is philosophical; it is in fact the most extensive treatise
on the philosophy of magic to be written anywhere west of India between
Iamblichus' On the Mysteries of the fourth century and Cornelius Agrippa's
Three Books of Occult Philosophy of the sixteenth.
The philosophy that grounds the magic of Picatrix is the same theurgic
Neoplatonism that fills both the books just mentioned, enriched—as
Agrippa's work also was—by the astrological mysticism that played so
large a role in the magical end of Neoplatonism after Iamblichus' time. To
Neoplatonists, among them the author and a great many of the readers of
Picatrix, the world was a hierarchy of levels of being, down which currents
of influence cascaded from the divine unity at its summit. The work of the
magician consisted of learning the ways of these currents, and drawing upon
them to perform magical works when they were at their strongest.
Picatrix was not simply a discussion of magical philosophy, however. It
contained an immense body of practical occult lore that had been gathered
up among Arab occultists over the two centuries or so before its anonymous
author put pen to paper. The practices of Neoplatonist theurgy contributed
a great deal to the collection, and so did the astral magic of Mesopotamia;
there are also workings in Picatrix that show close affinities with the magic
practiced in ancient Egypt, and others that are clearly borrowed from Hindu
tradition. No other book on magic from the Middle Ages contains anything
close to a comparable collection of magical technique
Much of the magic taught in Picatrix, in addition, used a particular
procedure that could be found in few other sources. That procedure seems
to have determined the name used most often for magic in the Latin text,
nigromantia, which literally means "black divination"—very nearly in the
sense that a modern book on espionage might refer to acts of sabotage and
the like as "black ops." Astrology, the principal method of divination in
the medieval world, was generally considered even by theologians to be a
legitimate and acceptable means of gathering information. What was not
acceptable to the orthodox was any more active use of the subtle currents of
influence that astrologers attempted to track, and this is exactly what Picatrix
taught. Its "black divination" focused on making talismans at times precisely

Jntroftiiction
chosen for their astrological properties, so that a specific influence radiated
thereafter from the talismans for good or ill. Unlike the later magic of the
grimoires, these workings required little ceremony and made only limited
use of divine names and words of power; their effectiveness came from the
heavens.
The audience of Picatrix differed from that of many other medieval
occult texts as well, for its anonymous author states repeatedly that it is
solely intended for the use of members of a particular profession of his time.
The Latin text gives that profession the title sapiens; we have translated it
"sage," but there is another English word perhaps even better suited to the
connotations the author had in mind: "wizard."
It is too rarely remembered that legendary figures such as Merlin, and
their fictional equivalents such as J.R.R. Tolkien's Gandalf the Grey, reflect an
authentic medieval phenomenon: the freelance occultist-scholar whose stock
in trade was as much useful advice as magical powers, and who aspired—and
very occasionally rose—to the position of councilor to kings. The author
of Picatrix conveniently lists the qualifications for a sapiens in Book IV,
chapter 5; they include a good working knowledge of the following topics:
agriculture, seafaring, and politics; the military sciences; "the civilized arts
by which people are helped," including grammar, languages, law, rhetoric,
writing, and economics; the four traditional branches of mathematics—
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music; logic, with the works of
Aristotle specifically singled out for study; medicine; the natural sciences, and
metaphysics, with Aristotle's writings on these two subjects again specifically
referenced.
From a modern perspective, this very demanding curriculum may seem
irrelevant to the work of a professional wizard. From within the worldview of
the Middle Ages and Renaissance, it was essential. Whether he was earning
a modest living by casting horary divinations in a marketplace or leading a
privileged life in a royal court, a wizard's job was to provide sound advice
to his clients. That advice would draw inspiration from astrology or one
of the other scholarly methods of divination practiced at the time, such as
geomancy, but it would also be informed by a broad education in very nearly
the entire body of useful knowledge that had survived the decline and fall of
the Roman world.
Nor, of course, did anyone in the Middle Ages or Renaissance perceive
the sort of rigid barrier between occult sciences, such as astrology, and
practical sciences, such as mathematics, that modern industrial cultures
consider self-evident. As Arthur Lovejoy usefully pointed out many years ago
in The Great Chain of Being, medieval and Renaissance cultures understood
the cosmos to be a unity, bound together by connections and influences

>4

C&e PicatriF-Jliber Hubeufi c£Dttion

extending from the throne of God above the heavens to the deepest recesses
of matter. The arts and sciences had their own proper place in that cosmos,
and each branch of human knowledge, however humble or exalted, cast a
distinctive light on all the others. Thus the sapiens, the sage or wizard of the
medieval world, took all human knowledge as his province and applied it to
the challenging task of providing sound guidance to his clients in a troubled
and often brutal world.

The Picatrix and the Necronomicon
he importance of the wizard as a professional found itself reflected
early on in literature and folklore, in such figures as Merlin the
Mage and Nectanebus, who played a Merlinesque role as magical
instructor to Alexander the Great in the medieval Alexander legends. The
concept of the magical book containing all the occult secrets of the universe
similarly found its way into the popular culture of the age. Just as wizards
passed in turn from medieval legend to modern fantasy fiction, in turn, the
archetype of the secret book of occult lore found a new home in modern
literature, and produced a remarkable parallel to Picatrix itself.
In a 1923 short story, "The Hound," pulp horror writer H. P. Lovecraft
first mentioned an imaginary tome of darkest magic titled the Necronomicon,
written by the equally fictional Arab wizard Abdul Alhazred. The
Necronomicon appeared frequently in Lovecraft's stories from then on, along
with other equally imaginary tomes such as the Pnakotic Manuscript, and
evolved into the core text of an imaginary religion of evil: the cult of the
Great Old Ones, terrifying beings from deep space who had ruled the Earth
in the prehistoric past and waited until "the stars were right" to resume their
dominion.
By 1927 the Necronomicon had become central enough to his "Cthulhu
Mythos" stories that Lovecraft wrote out a few pages on its supposed history
to help him keep his facts straight. According to this document,1 the
original Arabic name of the book was AlAzif, and it was compiled by Abdul
Alhazred around 730 CE, drawing on forbidden lore from Babylon, Egypt,
and a lost civilization in the "Empty Quarter" of the Arabian peninsula.
Alhazred himself was devoured by an invisible monster in the marketplace
of Damascus in 738, but copies of his book nonetheless got into circulation,
and it was translated into Greek by Theodorus Philetas in 950, who retitled it
Necronomicon. (Lovecraft interpreted this as "an image of the laws of death;"
this is not quite grammatical Greek, and a more accurate translation might be
1

Reprinted in Harms and Gome 2003, pp. 303-304.

3ntrotwctu>n

'5

"Concerning the Laws of Death," or possibly "Concerning Dead Laws.")
In 1228, the Danish scholar Olaus Wormius supposedly translated
the Necronomicon into Latin, and the famous British occultist John Dee,
Elizabeth I's court astrologer, made a manuscript English translation some
centuries later. From that point on, the history discusses how different
copies got into the places where it turned up in Lovecraft's stories and those
of other writers who borrowed his eldritch stage props, with his enthusiastic
permission, for their own horror tales.
By the last years of his life, Lovecraft was having to fend off requests
by fans and fellow writers that he find the time to manufacture the
Necronomicon. His work fell into obscurity for several decades after his death,
but it found newly appreciative audiences in the 1970s, and an assortment of
forged Necronomicons duly saw print thereafter. One, written by a group of
New York occultists under the pen name "Simon," appeared in a mass market
paperback edition in 1980 and became wildly popular among those members
of the occult community (unfortunately no small number) who had trouble
telling the difference between pulp horror fiction and genuine magic.
Among less credulous occultists, however, rumors began circulating
sometime in the 1990s that Lovecraft had modeled the Necronomicon on
Picatrix. This was admittedly only one of several stories that tried to link
the Necronomicon to some real work of magic, but the rumor gains a certain
degree of credibility from the remarkable parallels between the two works.
Like the Necronomicon, Picatrix was first written in Arabic, translated
into Latin in the thirteenth century, and circulated surreptitiously among
European occultists for centuries thereafter. Both books contain detailed
instructions for rituals meant to call down unhuman powers from what we
would now call outer space, and include malefic magical workings of terrific
power.
Lovecraft could easily have learned about Picatrix in time to use it as
a model for the Necronomicon, as the second volume of Lynn Thorndyke's
History of Magic and Experimental Science, which devotes an entire chapter to
Picatrix, was published in 1923. Still, the best study of the Necronomicon so
far, Daniel Harms and John Wisdom Gonce's The Necronomicon Files (2003),
points out that Lovecraft's knowledge of the occult was extremely limited,
and there is no evidence that he drew on anything but a few popular occult
exposes in constructing the dire rituals of his imaginary cult. Perhaps the
safest generalization is that if Picatrix did not exist, someone would have had
to invent it, and this is exactly what Lovecraft seems to have done.

i*

ID&e ^atrip-Jltber Hubeus dftrttfon
Picatrix in Practice

of the readers of this translation, like the readers of the original
^ J I r ^ Arabic and Latin editions, will read it in the hope of learning
^ F j k f how to practice its magic. This can certainly be done, but three
significant obstacles must be confronted by anyone who hopes to learn the
magic of Picatrix and put it to work in today's world.
First, nearly all the magical traditions that fill the pages of Picatrix and
provided the medieval wizard with his stock in trade are unfamiliar to most of
today's occultists, and the magical philosophy that underlies them will be even
more so. Readers steeped in modern occult lore may be startled to